---
title: "Tomorrow's power grid"
description: "As we lean more and more heavily on renewable energy sources, what will happen to the grid?"
author: "Ervin Chua"
date: 2018-01-16T22:18:41+11:00
---

Electricity makes a long journey from the power plant to your light bulb. This is possible thanks to a modern marvel: the energy grid, which ensures that power consistently flows to every home and business hooked up to it. But some grids, like the network spread across the United States, are old and inefficient, and modernizing them will take significant effort. Meanwhile, renewable energy has become so efficient that it now rivals fossil-fuel–derived processes. Technological innovations have invigorated the potential of energy storage, while data centers—once considered the grand energy drains of the 21st century—have plateaued their power consumption. In short, the power grid of tomorrow stands to benefit from technological advances made today—but it still requires a host of infrastructure improvements to graduate beyond the aging grid of yesteryear.

The power grid is the system that carries electricity from the power plant to your home. It’s broken down into three parts: generation, transmission, and distribution. Power plants generate energy in the form of electricity, which exits via thick transmission lines, typically strung up on huge metal frameworks far above street level. These are often marked “high voltage,” and with good reason: More electricity is lost when it travels at lower voltages, so for most of its journey to your home, it’s kept between 115 and 765 kilovolts. The electricity then runs through several intermediary substations, where transformers step down the power for domestic use. Close to its destination, the electricity is routed through low-voltage overhead or underground lines before arriving at your home or business, where it emerges from outlets at 120 or 240 volts (in the U.S., anyway—domestic voltage varies from 100 to 240 volts, depending on the country).

Energy is inevitably lost over the course of this journey. In fact, 4.7 percent of electricity generated in the U.S. was lost during transmission and distribution in 2015, according to estimates by the Department of Energy’s Energy Information Administration (EIA). But a larger concern is the existing infrastructure—the power lines, stations, and monitoring technology, which is many decades old. A 2016 report from the American Society of Civil Engineers estimated the shortfall in investment for the upkeep of the U.S. grid to be $177 billion through 2025, and $565 billion through 2040.

The U.S. government has been proposing modernization plans for years, but early motions, like the DOE’s 2007 pledge to allocate $51.8 million toward improving the electricity grid, seem overly modest in light of more recent predictions of what these improvements will cost. In 2011, industry experts estimated that the government’s modernization plan would cost up to $476 billion over the next 20 years (to be paid for in part by the power companies, who would pass much of the cost on to consumers), but would provide up to $2 trillion in customer benefits. That investment would ideally create a modern grid, which the Department of Energy’s 2015 Quadrennial Technology Review describes as follows:

<blockquote>
“A modern grid must be more flexible, robust, and agile. It must have the ability to dynamically optimize grid operations and resources, rapidly detect and mitigate disturbances, integrate diverse generation sources (on both the supply and demand sides), integrate demand response and energy-efficiency resources, enable consumers to manage their electricity use and participate in markets, and provide strong protection against physical and cyber risks.”
</blockquote>

In the first quarter of 2017, 37 U.S. states pursued or enacted grid modernization policies. Most of these are still in the proposal stage, and not everyone is on board, but the U.S. is, indeed, moving toward a modern grid. Here’s what it will look like.

<h3>Tomorrow’s grid: smarter and more responsive</h3>

Regardless of the budgetary and other challenges it faces, the U.S. energy sector is making progress toward modernizing the power grid. One of the most promising developments is also one of the simplest: demand response. Currently, power plants produce energy around the clock, raising or lowering the amount of electricity they’re pumping into the grid according to estimated demand. But this process is very inexact. By and large, we don’t know exactly how much energy is used, where it’s used, and at what times. But investing in demand response would give power plants—and overseers of the power grid in general—information they currently lack about how homes and businesses use electricity. Demand response turns the one-way power grid into a two-way network, with consumers feeding information back to producers. But this will require significant investment to install metering technology in every home, not just to supply energy producers with up-to-the-moment data, but to share this information with consumers as well.

Part of demand response entails motivating citizens to be conscious of their electricity use, especially compared to the energy demand in their area, and incentivizing them to make energy choices accordingly. According to the EIA, by the end of 2016, nearly half of American electric utility customers had smart meters installed. But many consumers—29 percent, according to a 2015 EIA survey of homeowners—aren’t even aware that their residences are equipped with smart meters. A paltry 8 percent knew they had access to hourly or daily data from their meter, and only 4 percent had accessed or viewed that data.

Smart meters are one element in the so-called “smart grid,” an umbrella term for the myriad improvements that could bring the power grid into the 21st century. More of a catchall term than a concrete list, it nevertheless covers applications of commercial technology to utility infrastructure. Some of these improvements include automated feeder switches, fiber optic and wireless networks, storage, and other new hardware, according to the DOE’s 2015 Quadrennial Technology Review.

Another, larger refinement will help consumers feed nominal energy back into the grid from their own generators. Most of the time, this means using domestically installed solar panels. But it will require a more complex grid that enables two-way electricity transfer. On a larger scale, this includes integrating microgrids, self-sufficient miniature power networks that exist alongside the main grid.

Tomorrow’s grid also has to factor in the growing use of electric vehicles. Their increased adoption will likely result in greater electricity consumption as consumers swap gas stations for charging ports. Widespread electric vehicle use will require a similarly large rollout of charging stations, which the power grid—and its infrastructure—will have to accommodate.
